Add Alerting feature documentation (#493)
wso2/docs-choreo-dev: en/docs/references/alerting.md

# Alerts

> Choreo notifies you when your production applications are in trouble. Whenever a Critical error (Out Of Memory ) occurs or whenever an error is logged by your application, your organization admins will be notified via an email about this incident. This email also contains a link that will take you to the Observability view and also highlights the metrics and logs during the erroneous interval. The alerts are collected every 5 mins (alerting interval) and published to the users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alerts are notifications sent by the system when the components that you are running in the production environment are not functioning as expected. Whenever a critical error (e.g., Out Of Memory) occurs of when the component logs an error, members of your organization with admin rights are notified about it via an email. This email also contains a link to the [Observability](../observability/observability-overview.md) view where the metrics and logs that occurred during the time interval in which the error occurred are highlighted. The alerting interval is five minutes long. At every alerting interval, the alerts are collected and published to the users.
```

## Types of Alerts

### Out Of Memory Alert

If the pod running your Choreo component goes out of memory, it will restart automatically. but during that interval the service will be unavailable and all the currently processing requests may become erroneous.
Because of this reason this error is very adverse for your application. Once an Out Of Memory occurs you will get an alert email like the one shown below.

![Out of Memory alert email](../assets/img/alerting/oom-email.png){.cInlineImage-full}

This email contains details about your component and how many times this event occurred within the alert monitoring period.
You can check the logs and the memory usage during that time period by clicking the **Check in Portal** button. This will take you to the Observability view of that particular component. You can also get support from WSO2 by using the **Contact us**  link provided at the bottom of  the alert email.

> #### How to troubleshoot Out of Memory error in the Observability view

Author: Is it necessary to mention what we are troubleshooting?
`Troubleshooting Out of Memory error`

> When you click the Check in Portal button you will be redirected to the Observe page of the component in the Choreo console.

Author: > 

What is the best way to call? Observe page or Observe tab?

> When you click the Check in Portal button you will be redirected to the Observe page of the component in the Choreo console.

Reviewer: Let's call it tab., and where relevant, **Observe** tab of the component.

> When you click the Check in Portal button you will be redirected to the Observe page of the component in the Choreo console.

Author: Ack

**1** shows the time bin where the Out of Memory error occurred will be highlighted for you and the logs that occurred during that time will be given within the scrollable Logs column. It will also contain the counts of how many such logs occurred.

![Log bins](../assets/img/alerting/log-bins.png){.cInlineImage-half}

The link given in the alert email will select a 1hour time range around the time in which the error occurred (i.e. error time +/- 30mins). This is shown in the diagram as **2**. The **Diagnostic View** is divided into 5 similar sized time bins. In this case, the size of each bin will be 12 mins. This is shown by **3**.

![Diagnostic view](../assets/img/alerting/diagnostic-view-values.png){.cInlineImage-half}

When you hover over the graph, you can see the Memory usage and it growing steadily and reaching the maximum value. This will cause the application to restart and it will log the Out of Memory error.

#### Selecting custom time ranges

If the time range that is selected automatically for you is not enough, you can select the time range that you desire and debug further. You can do this by clicking on the Time selection drop down bar shown by 1.

> ![Custom Time range](../assets/img/alerting/custom-time-range.png){.cInlineImage-half}

Author: Updated the image

> Then you can select the **Custom** option, this will automatically add the time range that is already given by the alert email. You can modify them to see the **Diagnostic View** for that  specific time range.

Author: There is a small correction in the above suggestion. 
1. Click drop down
2. Click `Custom`
3. Specify time range
4. Click apply

> Then you can select the **Custom** option, this will automatically add the time range that is already given by the alert email. You can modify them to see the **Diagnostic View** for that  specific time range.

Reviewer: Noted. Make sure "drop-down" is hyphenated.

For more information on how to use the Observability view for Root cause analysis check out the following [page](https://wso2.com/choreo/docs/observability/root-cause-analysis/). 

### Application Error Alert

This alert is triggered when you use the **“log:printError()”** function in your component and it logs an error. We consider that your component must have faced some serious problem and send you an email to notify you about this. The sample email will look like this. The email will provide details about the application and the **Check in Portal** link to view this log along with the request that caused this. You can also get support from WSO2 to troubleshoot this issue by using the **Contact us** link provided in the email.

> ![Application Error email](../assets/img/alerting/application-error-email.png){.cInlineImage-full}

Author: Removed the duplicate image

> #### How to troubleshoot Application error in the Observability view

Author: > 
Is it necessary to mention what we are troubleshooting? 
`Troubleshooting Application error`
Because we also have a similar heading at the top of the article
 `How to troubleshoot Out of Memory error in the Observability view`

> #### How to troubleshoot Application error in the Observability view

Reviewer: Since this is a subheading of the error type, it is understood. However, if it is better to mention what we are trouble shooting, we can have it as "Troubleshoot application error" and avoid present continuous tense in the heading.

> #### How to troubleshoot Application error in the Observability view

Author: Ack

> Once you click on the **Check in Portal** link you will be redirected to the observe page of the component in the Choreo console

Author: > 
What is the best way to call? Observe page or Observe tab?

> Once you click on the **Check in Portal** link you will be redirected to the observe page of the component in the Choreo console

Reviewer: Let's call it tab., and where relevant, Observe tab of the component.

![Application Error Troubleshooting](../assets/img/alerting/application-error-troubleshooting.png){.cInlineImage-full}

> This will open the **Throughput and Latency** view and automatically select the request that caused this error log. This is shown in **1**, it will show you the throughput and latency of the particular request. The color of the graph will tell you whether that request is successful or an error. You can also see the status of the request; its latency and status code indicated in a green colored circle in **4**. You will also see the error log that triggered the alert email in **2**. The time range used to highlight the relevant error log is indicated in **3**.  But you can scroll up and down and get more logs within the time range specified in **5**. You can also diagnose further by changing the selected time ranges. See the (**Selecting custom time ranges**) section above.

Author: **Throughput and Latency** should be called as `view` because it is a small part of the whole webpage whereas `tab` usually means the whole webpage itself

> This will open the **Throughput and Latency** view and automatically select the request that caused this error log. This is shown in **1**, it will show you the throughput and latency of the particular request. The color of the graph will tell you whether that request is successful or an error. You can also see the status of the request; its latency and status code indicated in a green colored circle in **4**. You will also see the error log that triggered the alert email in **2**. The time range used to highlight the relevant error log is indicated in **3**.  But you can scroll up and down and get more logs within the time range specified in **5**. You can also diagnose further by changing the selected time ranges. See the (**Selecting custom time ranges**) section above.

Reviewer: "view" is ok.

# Alerts

> Alerts are notifications sent by the system when the components that run in the production environment are not functioning as expected. Whenever a critical error (e.g., Out Of Memory error) occurs, the component logs an error and notifies the members of your organization with admin rights via an email. This email contains a link to the [**Observability**](../observability/observability-overview.md) tab of the component where the metrics and logs applicable to the time interval in which the error occurred are highlighted. The system collects and sends alerts to admin users every five minutes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alerts are notifications sent by the system when the components that run in the production environment are not functioning as expected. Whenever a critical error (e.g., out-of-memory error) occurs, the component logs an error and notifies the members of your organization with admin rights via an email. This email contains a link to the [**Observability**](../observability/observability-overview.md) tab of the component where the metrics and logs applicable to the time interval in which the error occurred are highlighted. The system collects and sends alerts to admin users every five minutes.
```

## Types of alert email notifications

When an alert occurs for the first time during the alerting interval, the system sends an alert email immediately. When there are multiple occurrences of the same type of alert for a particular component, the system suppresses the alerts for 15 minutes and generates a single email that specifies the event count to denote how many such errors occurred during an alerting interval.

## Types of alerts

> ### Out of Memory alert

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Out-of-memory alert
```

If the Kubernetes pod that runs your component goes out of memory, it restarts immediately. However, during that interval, the service becomes unavailable and the requests that it was processing at the time can become erroneous.
Due to this, the out-of-memory error can be very adverse for your component. Therefore, when an out-of-memory error occurs, the admin members of the organization that owns the component receive an alert email similar to the sample given below.

![Out of Memory alert email](../assets/img/alerting/oom-email.png){.cInlineImage-full}

This email contains details about your component and the number of times this event occurred within the alert monitoring period.

> You can check the logs and the memory usage during that time interval by clicking **Check in Portal**. This takes you to the Observability view of that particular component. You can also contact WSO2 for support via the **Contact us** link provided at the bottom of the alert email.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check the logs and the memory usage during that time interval by clicking **Check in Portal**. This takes you to the **Observability** tab of that particular component. You can also contact WSO2 for support via the **Contact us** link provided at the bottom of the alert email.
```

> #### Troubleshoot Out of Memory error

Reviewer: ```
#### Troubleshooot out-of-memory error
```

Author: Done

> When you click the Check in Portal button you will be redirected to the Observe page of the component in the Choreo console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you click **Check in Portal**, you are redirected to the **Observe** tab of the component in the Choreo Console.
```

![OOM Troubleshooting](../assets/img/alerting/oom-troubleshooting.png){.cInlineImage-full}

> The item marked  **1** in the above image shows the time bin where the Out of Memory error that occurred is highlighted and the other logs that occurred during that time are displayed within the scrollable Logs column. It also contains the count of such logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The item marked **1** in the above image shows the time bin where the out-of-memory error that occurred is highlighted and the other logs that occurred during that time are displayed within the scrollable **Logs** column. It also contains the count of such logs.
```

> The item marked  **1** in the above image shows the time bin where the Out of Memory error that occurred is highlighted and the other logs that occurred during that time are displayed within the scrollable Logs column. It also contains the count of such logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The item marked **1** in the above image shows the time bin where the Out of Memory error that occurred is highlighted and the other logs that occurred during that time are displayed within the scrollable **Logs** column. It also contains the count of such logs.
```

![Log bins](../assets/img/alerting/log-bins.png){.cInlineImage-half}

> Item **2** is the one-hour time range around the point of time at which the error occurred (i.e. error time +/- 30mins). In the **Diagnostic View** tab, this  time range is further divided into 5 similar sized time bins. In this scenario, the size of each bin is 12 minutes. These 12-minute bins are shown by **3**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Item **2** is the one-hour time range around the point of time at which the error occurred (i.e. error time +/- 30mins). In the **Diagnostic View** tab, this time range is further divided into 5 similar-sized time bins. In this scenario, the size of each bin is 12 minutes. These 12-minute bins are marked **3**.

![Diagnostic view](../assets/img/alerting/diagnostic-view-values.png){.cInlineImage-half}

When you hover over the graph, you can view the memory usage. You can note that it has increased steadily during the time interval and reached the maximum value. This causes the application to log the out-of-memory error and restart.

> ### Select custom time range

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Select a custom time range
```

> ###Select custom time range

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Select custom time range
```

If you want to change the automatically selected time interval (i.e., one hour) for debugging purposes, do as follows:

1. Click the drop-down bar for time selection (marked in the image below).

    ![Custom Time range](../assets/img/alerting/custom-time-range.png){.cInlineImage-half}

> 2. Click **Custom**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Click **Custom**.
```

   
3. Specify the time range for which you want to view logs in the **Diagnostics View** tab by entering the required times in the **From** and **To** fields.

4. Click **Apply**.

> For more information on how to use the Observability view for root cause analysis, see [Root Cause Analysis](../observability/root-cause-analysis.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on how to use the **Observe** tab for root cause analysis, see [Root Cause Analysis](../observability/root-cause-analysis.md).

### Application Error alert

This alert is triggered when you use the **“log:printError()”** function in your component and the component logs an error via that. Such errors indicate that your component is unable to function as designed, and therefore you are notified via an email so that you can troubleshoot them. The following is a sample of such a notification email. 

![Application Error email](../assets/img/alerting/application-error-email.png){.cInlineImage-full}

> This email provides details about the component. You can click **Check in Portal** to open the Observability view in the Choreo Console for this component. You can also get support from WSO2 via the **Contact us** link provided in the email.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This email provides details about the component. You can click **Check in Portal** to open the **Observe** tab in the Choreo Console for this component. You can also get support from WSO2 via the **Contact us** link provided in the email.

> #### Troubleshoot Application error

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Troubleshoot application error
```

Once you click **Check in Portal** in the notification email, you are redirected to the **Observe** tab of the component in the Choreo Console.

![Application Error Troubleshooting](../assets/img/alerting/application-error-troubleshooting.png){.cInlineImage-full}

This opens the **Throughput and Latency** view in which the request that caused the error log is automatically selected (see **1**  in the image above). The graphs in this tab display the throughput and the latency for this request. The color of the graph indicates whether the request was successfully processed or whether it resulted in an error. 

In addition, you can observe the following:

- The error log that triggered the alert mail (marked **2** in the image).

> - The time range for which the error log applies (marked **3** in the image). However, you can scroll to view more logs that occurred during the time range selected for debugging purposes via the drop-down field marked **5** in the image. You can update this time range as explained under [Select custom time range](#select-custom-time-range).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The time range for which the error log applies (marked **3** in the image). However, you can scroll to view more logs that occurred during the time range selected for debugging purposes. This time range is selected via the drop-down field marked **5** in the image. You can update this time range as explained under [Select custom time range](#select-custom-time-range).
```

> - The time range for which the error log applies (marked **3** in the image). However, you can scroll to view more logs that occurred during the time range selected for debugging purposes. This time range is selected via the drop-down field marked **5** in the image. You can update this time range as explained under [Select custom time range](#select-custom-time-range).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The time range for which the error log applies (marked **3** in the image). However, you can scroll to view more logs that occurred during the time range selected for debugging purposes. This time range is selected via the drop-down field marked **5** in the image. You can update this time range as explained under [Select custom time range](#select-a-custom-time-range).
```

> - The time range for which the error log applies (marked **3** in the image). However, you can scroll to view more logs that occurred during the time range selected for debugging purposes. This time range is selected via the drop-down field marked **5** in the image. You can update this time range as explained under [Select custom time range](#select-a-custom-time-range).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The time range for which the error log applies (marked **3** in the image). However, you can scroll to view more logs that occurred during the time range selected for debugging purposes. This time range is selected via the drop-down field marked **5** in the image. You can update this time range as explained under [Select a custom time range](#select-a-custom-time-range).
```
